---
toc: false
layout: post
description: Thriving in a Job Sector Overvaluing Itself.
categories: [writing]
title: Professional Experience in a Personal World
---

Remember Ryan Howard from the Office? Ryan was one of the first characters introduced on the show, initially a temp who rose from junior salesman to one of the leaders of the company, despite his absolutely atrocious sales record (he literally made zero sales). Why do I bring him up? Because he is a stellar example of the issue plaguing many companies today, the overvaluation of ineffective and unnecessary professional experience in the job sector. This has effectively made an industry nearly impossible to enter, and one where ineffective evaluations are a major focus.

With an increasingly rampant demand for professionals in the tech sector, it is no surprise that jobs have somewhat adjusted to fill in these gaps. According to a study by LinkedIn Economic Graph is August 2021, nearly 35% of Entry-Level Job postings, which are aimed at fresh graduates with limited relevant experience entering the job sector, on LinkedIn released over the 45 months prior to the study paradoxically required at least three years of experience with relevant technologies. Many of these jobs perform high-level work that experienced professionals would do but are yet marketed as "entry-level" jobs, and hence most fresh graduates are unable to procure jobs at these companies. To counteract this demand, programmes allowing students to get a taste of the job sector can be introduced. Herein comes the concept of internships, which are specialised programmes intended to help students learn and prepare for the job, but that, unfortunately, is not the case.

Nowadays, internships are considered building blocks for entering such jobs since they help boost your professional resume and train you to be the next generation of workers in the company. However, since these younger, inexperienced students generally do not possess the relevant skills for most of the tasks in larger companies, instead of being trained and taught the real-world problem-solving process, they are relegated to doing busywork and do not acquire the relevant skills. Hence, when the time comes to apply for jobs, they are unable to justify their legitimate experience, even if they are accepted due to the ineffective professional experience alone.

Personal projects often help students realise and understand technologies in a way theoretical lectures can never do, and as Einstein reinstated countless times, "The only source of knowledge is experience". Many personal projects display the student's creativity, passion and capability with using certain tools to solve problems, but they do not necessarily fit with company visions and do not demonstrate how the students can handle the vicissitudes of pressure in the workplace, which leads to many companies disregarding them in favour of professional jobs that are based on well-defined job quotas that lack creativity and are rooted more in mudane yet high-pressure work. We need to redefine our understanding of experience and realise that it does not equate to skill level. Employers need to be more open to open projects rather than simple corporate-ordained work.

Some may argue that these high-skill jobs entail conducting work in a reasonable and effective manner, and companies require proof that the employee is sufficiently skilled. Experience and skill are, in hindsight, quite correlated since they both define one’s ability. In fact, experience is often used as a purview of one’s ability and skill due to the simple fact that it is a quantitative metric which is logically easier to justify than your actual expertise.

However, the inherent flaw here is that companies still define experience levels as the best way to quantify your skill. which is not the case, since multiple experiences can be achieved with little work. Many who have longer years of experience could be in that predicament because of a slower learning rate, which is not ideal for companies aiming to hire proficient young employees. Not just that, experienced employees often lose motivation in the process of the task, due to getting accustomed to work done during their previous experiences. All in all, quantifying skills based on years of experience is an illogical decision to make, since it benefits neither party.

In the end, students need to make an effort to work on novel projects that have a relevance to real-world issues so that their projects are considered useful. They need to understand the scope of the job, and employers need to be more direct in their reasoning for specific skills. Identifying students and training them from a young age is especially useful, especially if they receive actual mentorship under industry professionals, so that they get to solve problems with their own hands and gain dexterity in these tasks. After all, as Malcolm Gladwell said in his 2008 book, "Outliers", "Practice isn’t the thing you do once you’re good, it’s the thing that you do that makes you good."